.. _Boost: http://www.boost.org/users/download/
.. _Perl: https://www.perl.org/
.. _Python: https://www.python.org/
.. _RSEM: https://github.com/deweylab/RSEM
.. _EggNOG-Emapper: https://github.com/jhcepas/eggnog-mapper
.. _DIAMOND: https://github.com/bbuchfink/diamond
.. _GeneMarkS-T: http://exon.gatech.edu/GeneMark/
.. _CMake: https://cmake.org/
.. _InterProScan: https://github.com/ebi-pf-team/interproscan
.. _TransDecoder: https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder/releases
.. _NCBI Taxonomy: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy

Installation from Source Code
=================================

#. :ref:`System Requirements<sys-label>`
#. :ref:`Download EnTAP Source Code<ent-label>`
#. :ref:`Installing Pipeline Software<dep-label>`
#. :ref:`EnTAP Installation<entap-label>`

.. _sys-label:

System Requirements
-----------------------------------
  
    * Operating System

        * UNIX-based systems
        * Tested on 64 bit systems: ubuntu 16.04, Rocks 6.1, Centos 6.3

    * Storage Minimum

        * EnTAP Database (Gene Ontology References + UniProt Mapping + NCBI Taxonomy): 1.5Gb
        * EggNOG Databases: 24Gb
        * DIAMOND Databases: ~13Gb (with RefSeq Complete Protein + Uniprot Swiss-Prot)
        * Additional storage for files generated depending on transcriptome size: upwards of 15Gb

    * Memory

        * At least 16 Gb of RAM (will vary depending on DIAMOND database sizes). More memory is highly recommended to reduce execution times.

.. _dep-label:

Dependency Check
-----------------------------------
Before continuing on in the installation process, ensure that the following dependencies are fully installed on your system:

    * C++11 compiler (GCC 4.8.1 or later)
	
    * CMake_ (3.00 or later)
	
    * Python_ (2.7.12 or later) with support for the following modules	
    
        * Matplotlib (figures generated by EnTAP)
		
    * Unix wget (generally included in most distros)
	
    * Unix gzip/tar (generally included in most distros)


.. _ent-label:

Downloading EnTAP Source Code
----------------------------------------
First, download and extract the latest release(tagged) version from GitLab:
https://gitlab.com/EnTAP/EnTAP/tags

This repository contains the source code for RSEM, TransDecoder, and DIAMOND to be used with EnTAP.

.. _pipe-label:

Installing Pipeline Software
--------------------------------------------
EnTAP leverages several software distributions within the pipeline to provide the best quality annotations. The packages used (and their current/compatible versions) can be seen below. This is not to say that newer versions will not be compatible, however they have not been tested yet with EnTAP. By default, EnTAP will use Transdecoder for frame selection, however both TransDecoder and GeneMarkS-T are supported and you may install either.

.. note:: If the software is already installed on your system, this stage can be skipped

Supported Software:
    * RSEM_ (Expression Filtering with alignment file): version 1.3.3 packaged with EnTAP

        * Version 1.3.0
        * Version 1.3.3

    * TransDecoder_ (Frame Selection): version 5.7.1 packaged with EnTAP
	
        * Version 5.3.0
        * Version 5.7.1

    * GeneMarkS-T_ (Frame Selection): version 5.1 must be installed separately (if not using TransDecoder)

        * Version 5.1

    * DIAMOND_ (Similarity Search): version 2.1.8 packaged with EnTAP

        * Version 0.8.31
        * Version 0.9.19
        * Version 0.9.9
        * Version 2.1.8

    * InterProScan_ (Protein Databases): must be installed separately
   
        * Version 5.19

.. _diamond-label:

DIAMOND Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
From root EnTAP directory...

.. code-block :: bash

    cd libs/
    tar -xvzf diamond-v2.1.8.tar.gz
    cd diamond-v2.1.8
    mkdir bin
    cd bin
    cmake ..

Run the following command to install globally:

.. code-block :: bash

    make install

Run the following command to compile:

.. code-block :: bash

    make


All set! Ensure that DIAMOND has been properly setup and add the correct path to the entap_config.txt file. If installed globally, add 'diamond' (without quotes) to the file. If installed locally, add 'path/to/EnTAP/libs/diamond-0.9.9/bin/diamond'.

.. _rsem-label:

RSEM Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

From root EnTAP directory...

.. code-block :: bash

    cd libs/
    tar -xvzf RSEM-v1.3.3.tar.gz
    cd RSEM-v1.3.3
    make
    make ebseq

Run the following command to install globally:

.. code-block :: bash

    make install

All set! Ensure that RSEM has been properly setup and add the correct path to the entap_config.txt file. If installed globally keep blank. If installed locally, add 'path/to/EnTAP/libs/RSEM-1.3.0/'.

.. _entap-label:

EnTAP Installation
----------------------------

Once dependencies and pipeline software have been installed, you can now continue to install EnTAP! 

Within the main directory, execute the following command:

.. code-block :: bash

    cmake CMakeLists.txt

This will generate a MakeFile. Then execute:

.. code-block :: bash

    make

Or to install to a destination directory:

.. code-block :: bash

    cmake CMakeLists.txt -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=/destination/dir

.. code-block :: bash

    make install

If you receive no errors, please move on to the last stage in installation, configuration.
